--
title: Risam - New Digital worlds
layout: post
author: e2dubba
tags: digitalhumanities, criticaltheory
category: dh
---


# Risam - New Digital worlds

Roopika Risam, _New Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory,
Praxis, and Pedagogy_. Chicago; Northwestern University Press, 2019.


Risam address the important problem of the unspoken imperialism embedded in
many Digital Humanities projects. She approaches this from four different
angles: the selection of corpora for digital humanities, the societies and
what gets counted as a worthwhile project, how digital humanities is taught,
and the theoretical underpinnings of digital humanities. In each of these
four cases Risam shows that combining postcolonial theory with digital
humanities not only improves digital humanities but also postcolonial
theory. Postcolonial theory is usually tied to literary studies, but Risam
builds on the fact that both literature and programming are actively creating
new worlds, and the same sorts of political forces are at play in both. 

When Risam explores the selection of corpora, she points out how difficult it
can be to find a postcolonial texts. Many of which were actively suppressed,
or lost to the cultural record. The digital cultural record is dominated by
the corpora valued by the Global North. Using postcolonial theory, Risam
addresses this in two ways. One, she points out that even the most colonial of
archives (like the records from the British Empire; or even the records of
David Livingstone) can be mined for alternative stories and records of
minority voices. Second, local practices and local texts should be given a
prominence in digital humanities projects. Often these collections are
discounted because they are not technologically innovative, but these kinds of
projects can be vital for the communities that created them and for whom they
were created. 

The global network of digital humanities organizations and institutes is
centralized in the Global North. Risam argues that we need to change the model
of our societies and institutes from being a model focused on centers and
peripheries, but rather take the metaphor of a diaspora. With a diaspora the
localized practices of digital humanities can be emphasized and allowed to grow
and cross pollinate with other local practices. A scholarly interconnected
network based on centers in peripheries threatens to dampen the local
characteristics of digital humanities, as well as overlook interesting work,
that does not fit the model of the global north. 

Risam notes the difficulty of combining both postcolonial theory and digital
humanities in one pedagogical practice: it is a lot to cover. However, the
pedagogical reward is worth the challenge. Risam points out that digital
humanities skills and methods place the means of knowledge production in the
hands of the students. This provides the hands on practical experience
that drives home the politics of knowledge production. The combination of
digital humanities and postcolonial theory also give students critical tools
to understand social media. Students as digital natives is a damaging myth,
and postcolonial theory and seizing the means of knowledge production can
provide students necessary tools to understand the digital world. 

Risam asks the question: What is human in the digital humanities? The conflict
between STEM and Humanities as been entrenched in the university, but framing
it as a conflict of ideals helps neither side. She re-frames the question in
terms of critical theory: what is the human? She shows how a under theorized
view of humanity has led to a universal idea of human that is shaped more by
the technology companies of Silicon Valley, which has led to some of the abuse
of algorithms noted by other scholars. A postcolonial digital humanities does
not provide the answers, rather they help frame questions and point out
implicit biases and power structures in projects, giving a clearer
understanding of what is being implied in the human, and who may be displaced
by a given scientific project. 

Roopika Risam's book explores the importance of postcolonial theory in all
aspects of digital humanities. These are important considerations for all
digital humanities projects and I would highly recommend it for anyone
interested in both digital humanities and postcolonial theory. 

