---
title: Rochberg - Before Nature
layout: post
author: e2dubba
tags: astrology, science, knowledge, scholarship
category: astrology
---


# Rochberg - Before Nature

Francesca Rochberg, _Before Nature: Cuneiform Knowledge and the History of
Science_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016.


The main thrust of Rochberg's book is that too often the history of science is
framed as the history of the study of nature. Rochberg rightly points out that
cuneiform culture does not fit into that schema, because there is no concept
of "nature" in cuneiform culture. Rather, Rochberg points to rationality,
order, modals, observation, and prediction all point to predecessors to the
history of science, but yet, a history of science that is framed in terms of
nature. However, Rochberg also cautions against taking the teology of this
proto-science as the lens through which one investigates culture: cuneiform
scholarship is more interesting, complex, and varied for more than the places
it is analogous to contemporary practices of science (see especially p. 276).
Rochberg points out that analogy is at the heart of Mesopotamian reasoning (p.
158).

One of the key insights I wanted to glean from this book is to help answer the
question: What subjects are worthy of scholarship in the cuneiform world? What
did the ancient scholars see as a worthy object of study? Rochberg shows how
astrology fits into that, and goes into detail as to _how_ a ṭupšarru would go
about studying the stars, and _why_ they did. Rochberg focused on the
analogical way cuneiform scholars investigated the stars, but she mentions in
the conclusion that thematic and visual frames of reference would also be
worth exploring. The analagical frame is also key for understanding the
lexical tradition as well. 

Chapter three: "On Knowledge among Cuneiform Scholars" delves right into one
my central interests on what was import, and how cuneiform scholars organized
that knowledge. Rochberg pulls on the fact that taxonomy was different in the
ancient Near East, and we should carefully avoid reading our own categories
into these into scholarly texts from these periods. Rochberg carefully lays
out the social historical and political contexts that developed these
scholarly works. One work that she mentions, which I need to look deeper into
is Eleanor Robson's "Reading the Libraries of Ancient Assyria and Babylonia"
in _Ancient Libraries_. Edited by Jason König, Katerina Oikonomopolou, and
Greg Woolf. Pages 38-56. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013. One
thing that cuneiform scholars were better at is recognizing the polythetic
nature of classification. Taxonomies were not rigid. 

